OBJECTIVE To analyze histological factors not routinely assessed as potential prognostic factors in renal cell carcinoma , such as tumor necrosis , microscopic vascular invasion , and sinus fat invasion .
MATERIALS AND METHODS A retrospective , analytical study was conducted of surgical specimens from 139 patients with localized renal cell carcinoma who underwent nephrectomy from 1993 to 2005 .
Tumor necrosis , microscopic vascular invasion , and sinus fat invasion were analyzed and compared to the classical factors : TNM classification , Fuhrman grade , and tumor size .
For statistical analysis , variables analyzed were categorized as pT1 , 2 vs pT3 , 4 ; Fuhrman grade 1 , 2 vs 3 , 4 ; tumor size < 7 cm vs >or= 7cm ; tumor necrosis vs no tumor necrosis ; microvascular invasion of sinus fat vs no invasion .
Cancer-specific survival probability and disease-free survival were calculated .
A descriptive and analytical statistical analysis was performed using logistic regression for univariate and multivariate analyses .
Dependent variables were used to analyze cancer-specific survival rates .
Disease-free survival was estimated using a Cox regression model and Kaplan-Meier curves .
RESULTS In the univariate analysis , all variables analyzed had a significant influence on death for renal cell carcinoma .
In the multivariate analysis , the variable having the greatest influence was Fuhrman grade ( p = 0,032 ) .
The variables significantly influencing disease-free survival , estimated by the Cox method , were the pT stage ( p = 0.038 ) and Fuhrman grade ( p = 0.048 ) .
CONCLUSIONS In patients with clinically localized renal cell carcinoma undergoing nephrectomy , pT stage and Fuhrman grade are the most important prognostic factors for survival and disease-free survival .
Tumor necrosis , microscopic vascular invasion , and sinus fat invasion are prognostic factors for death from renal carcinoma which are associated to TNM classification , Fuhrman grade , and tumor size .
