A novel camptothecin derivative ( TLC388 ) with higher efficacy and reduced toxicity has been synthesized and tested as a novel chemoradiosensitizing agent .
This study investigated the mechanisms of the chemoradiosensitizing effects of TLC388 on H23 human non-small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) cells .
Using the TUNEL assay , a significantly higher percentage of apoptotic cells was observed in the group treated with TLC388 plus X-ray radiation than those in groups treated with drug or radiation alone .
The sensitizer enhancement ratio ( SER ) was 1.91 .
Apoptosis increased with drug concentration and radiation dose , exhibiting dose-dependent pattern .
The results suggested that apoptosis could be a main mode of cell death that might underlie the increased chemoradio-sensitization of TLC388 .
Treatment with 30 nM of TLC388 plus 4 Gy X-ray also produced up to 42% of necrotic cells that were measured by trypan blue exclusion assay , but with TLC388 alone or 4 Gy radiation alone 9.8% or 11.1% necrotic cells were detected , respectively .
An immunofluorescent staining method was employed to determine the levels of gamma-H2AX ( phosphorylated H2AX , a variant of the H2A protein family , which is a component of the histone octomer in nucleosomes and is phosphorylated by kinases like ATM and ATR in the PI3K pathway , as the first step in recruiting and localizing DNA repair proteins ) as a molecular biomarker of DNA double strand breaks ( DSBs ) in cells treated with TLC388 +/-radiation , or radiation alone .
The formation of gamma-H2AX foci was observed after TLC388 or radiation exposure and when the cells were treated with 30 nM TLC388 plus radiation at a dose of 2 Gy , the percentage of cells containing gamma-H2AX foci increased significantly .
Even more interesting , a markedly higher percentage ( 65.4% ) of mitotic cells displayed gamma-H2AX foci after treatment with 30 nM TLC388 plus 0.5 Gy radiation , compared to only 5.9% or 26.1% of the M-phase cells treated with 30 nM TLC388 alone or 0.5 Gy radiation alone , respectively .
It is suggested that mitotic cells become very sensitive to the production of DSBs after TLC388-radiation combined treatment and the formation of DSBs is strongly suggested to lead to the induction of apoptosis at doses lower than 4 Gy and to some necrosis at doses of 4 Gy or above .
TLC388 enhances the production of DSBs and inhibits their repair , which contributes to the elucidation of the mechanisms of chemoradiosensitization of TLC388 and its development as a novel chemoradiosensitizing drug for improved radiotherapy .
