OBJECTIVE To study the clinicopathologic features , immunophenotype and ultrastructural features of sinonasal inflammatory myofibroblastic tumors ( IMT ) .
METHODS The clinical and histologic features of 5 cases of sinonasal IMT were reviewed .
Immunohistochemical study for vimentin , MSA , SMA , calponin , h-caldesmon , desmin , ALK , fibronectin , CK , S-100 and Ki-67 was carried out .
Ultrastructural examination was also performed in two of the cases .
RESULTS The patients age ranged from 28 to 62 years ( mean = 43 years ) .
The male-to-female ratio was 2:3 .
The clinical presentation included nasal obstruction , nasal discharge , nasal bleeding , facial pain , facial swelling , toothache and tear overflow .
All of the 5 patients suffered from disease relapses ; and 4 of them had recurrences for more than 5 times .
One patient had lymph node metastasis and 3 patients died of the disease .
Histologically , the tumor cells were arranged in interlacing fascicles and sometimes haphazard in fashion .
They were spindly in shape , cytoplasm eosinophilic with mild nuclear atypia and a low mitotic activity .
The intervening stroma was myxoid in appearance accompanied by lymphocyte and plasma cell infiltration , abundant blood vessels and focal collagenized areas .
In 3 of the recurrent cases , the tumor cells displayed increased nuclear atypia and mitotic activity ( average about 5 to 6 per 10 high-power fields ) , accompanied by patchy necrosis , less inflammatory cell infiltration and focal sarcomatous changes .
Immunohistochemical study showed that the tumor cells were diffusely positive for vimentin .
SMA , MSA , calponin and fibronectin were variably expressed .
Desmin was weakly positive in 1 case .
The staining for h-caldesmon , ALK , S-100 and CK was negative .
The Ki-67 proliferation index increased with tumor recurrences .
Electron microscopy revealed abundant rough endoplasmic reticulum and dense body formation in the cytoplasm .
There were an increased amount of collagen fibers in the stroma .
CONCLUSIONS IMT rarely occurs in nasal cavity and paranasal sinuses .
The tumor is prone to local invasion and recurrences , with subsequent progression to frank malignancy and distant metastasis , resulting in high mortality and poor prognosis .
Complete surgical resection remains the main modality of treatment .
