Spindle cell oncocytoma ( SCO ) of the pituitary gland is a relatively recently established , very rare subtype of adenohypophysis tumours that was introduced as a distinct clinicopathological entity in the fourth edition of WHO classification of the central nervous system tumours ( 2007 ) .
It is non-endocrine neoplasm of the anterior pituitary that occurs in adults and usually follows a benign clinical course , corresponding to WHO grade I. Up to now , pituitary SCO have been reported occasionally and only 14 cases of SCO have been documented in the literature .
Because of their rarity , the pathogenesis and natural history of these tumours have not been fully characterized .
We report two additional cases of SCO occurring in females aged 63 years ( Case 1 ) and 65 years ( Case 2 ) , who presented with pan-hypopituitarism , headache and visual field defect .
In both cases , the magnetic resonance imaging showed solid sellar mass of moderate size with suprasellar extension .
The clinical and radiological features suggested non-functioning pituitary macroadenomas without evidence of invasive growth .
One patient presented with tumour recurrence 3 years after undergoing the previous surgical removal of tumour , which was initially misdiagnosed as schwannoma .
The first tumour was removed by transsphenoidal surgery and the second one by frontal craniotomy .
Histologically and immunohistochemically , both tumours displayed the features typical for SCO of the pituitary .
They were composed of interwoven fascicles of spindle cells exhibiting abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm of oncocytic or granular appearance .
Mitoses were rarely observed and necrosis was absent .
In one case , the advanced lymphocytic infliltration was observed within neoplastic tissue .
The tumour cells exhibited immunoreactivity for S-100 protein , galectin-3 , vimentin and epithelial membrane antigen but they were negative for GFAP , anterior pituitary neuroendocrine markers ( prolactin , growth hormone , TSH , ACTH , FSH , LH ) , chromogranin , synaptophysin , cytokeratin CK ( AE1/AE3 ) , smooth muscle actin , desmin , CD34 and CD68 .
MIB1 labeling index did not exceed 10% .
Ultrastructurally , the tumour cells were rich in mitochondria with lamellar cristae .
Moreover , in Case 2 some tumour cells showed a number of giant mitochondria with severely destructed internal matrix .
Spindle cell oncocytoma of the anterior pituitary is often misdiagnosed entity of uncertain histogenesis .
It should be considered in the differential diagnosis of various sellar-region lesions of oncocytic morphology .
