Active avoidance by tumor cells from attack and elimination by immune cells is an emerging cancer hallmark that is achieved primarily through decreasing the levels of major histocompatibility complex class I ( MHC-I ) at the cancer cells ' surface .
Deficiencies in MHC-I antigen-restricted immunosurveillance may be intertwined with an altered , Warburg-like cancer cell-intrinsic metabolism , another emerging hallmark of cancer that involves a switch from mitochondrial respiration to glycolysis to efficiently support large-scale biosynthetic programs that are required for active cell proliferation .
We recently envisioned that intervention strategies aimed at reversing the bioenergetic signature of cancer cells ( e.g. , the antidiabetic biguanide metformin ) should correct oncogene ( e.g. , HER2)-driven MHC-I defects , thus preventing immune escape of oncogene transformants .
First , we explored how metformin treatment impacted mitochondrial biogenesis in cultured breast cancer cells overexpressing the membrane tyrosine kinase receptor HER2 , the best-characterized downregulator of MHC-I .
Metformin exposure was found to dose-dependently increase the expression levels of cytochrome c oxidase I and mitochondrial succinate dehydrogenase , which are encoded by mitochondrial and nuclear DNA , respectively .
Second , we explored whether metformin-enhanced mitochondrial biogenesis might significantly alter the MHC-I status in breast carcinoma cells .
MHC-I expression , as assessed by flow cytometry using an anti-HLA-ABC monoclonal antibody , was fully restored ( up to upregulation ) in MHC-I-negative HER2 gene-amplified carcinoma cells .
These findings may help delineate a previously unrecognized mechanism through which metformin ( and metformin-like drugs ) may enable a cancer patient's own immune system to mount an efficient anti-metastasis response that can prevent or delay disease recurrence .
Restored antigenicity and immunogenicity of tumor cells may represent a previously unrecognized primary mode of action underlying the cancer-preventive effects of metformin .
