The subtelomeric regions of organisms ranging from protists to fungi undergo a much higher rate of rearrangement than is observed in the rest of the genome .
While characterizing these regions of the human fungal pathogen Cryptococcus neoformans , we have identified a recent gene amplification event near the right telomere of chromosome 3 that involves a gene encoding an arsenite efflux transporter ( ARR3 ) .
The 3,177-bp amplicon exists in a tandem array of 2-15 copies and is present exclusively in strains with the C. neoformans var. grubii subclade VNI A5 MLST profile .
Strains bearing the amplification display dramatically enhanced resistance to arsenite that correlates with the copy number of the repeat ; the origin of increased resistance was verified as transport-related by functional complementation of an arsenite transporter mutant of Saccharomyces cerevisiae .
Subsequent experimental evolution in the presence of increasing concentrations of arsenite yielded highly resistant strains with the ARR3 amplicon further amplified to over 50 copies , accounting for up to of the whole genome and making the copy number of this repeat as high as that seen for the ribosomal DNA .
The example described here therefore represents a rare evolutionary intermediate-an array that is currently in a state of dynamic flux , in dramatic contrast to relatively common , static relics of past tandem duplications that are unable to further amplify due to nucleotide divergence .
Beyond identifying and engineering fungal isolates that are highly resistant to arsenite and describing the first reported instance of microevolution via massive gene amplification in C. neoformans , these results suggest that adaptation through gene amplification may be an important mechanism that C. neoformans employs in response to environmental stresses , perhaps including those encountered during infection .
More importantly , the ARR3 array will serve as an ideal model for further molecular genetic analyses of how tandem gene duplications arise and expand .
