WHAT IS ALREADY KNOWN ABOUT THIS SUBJECT Previous studies have indicated that the levels of DNA damage induced in peripheral blood mononuclear cells by the alkylating drugs melphalan , cisplatin and carboplatin can serve as useful biomarkers predictive of the therapeutic response of cancer patients to these drugs .
WHAT THIS STUDY ADDS In the present study we developed a quantitative PCR-based assay , for the measurement of DNA damage .
The advantages of this methodology are based on : its far greater sensitivity ( about 250 times ) than the traditional Southern blot-based method ( the detection limit is lesions/10(6) nucleotides from the equivalent DNA of cells ) ; its simplicity and speed ( results obtained within its excellent reproducibility , with a coefficient of variance of 10-15% for different DNA preparations from similarly treated cells ; its requirement for only minute amounts of material , and ; the avoidance of radioisotope labeling .
Moreover , emphasis was given to translate basic research findings into clinical practice through the validation of this assay for prediction of clinical outcome in multiple myeloma patients .
AIM In order to develop and validate a simple , sensitive and rapid method for the quantitation of alkylating drug-induced DNA damage .
METHODS HepG2 cells and blood samples were treated with alkylating drugs ( melphalan , cisplatin , carboplatin ) .
Gene-specific damage was examined using Southern blot and a multiplex long quantitative PCR ( QPCR ) carried out in a 7\u2003kb fragment ( part of the p53 gene ) and a 0.5\u2003kb fragment ( part of the IFN-\u03b21 sequence ; internal standard ) .
RESULTS The extent of PCR amplification of a p53 fragment was inversely proportional to the treatment concentrations of all anticancer drugs examined , indicating a dose-related inhibition by the DNA adducts formed .
Parallel analysis of the same samples using both Southern blot and QPCR showed that the DNA adducts measured by QPCR corresponded to the interstrand cross-links in the case of melphalan , and to total drug-induced lesions in the case of the platinum drugs .
The detection limit was lesions/10(6) nucleotides using DNA from cells .
The method is about 250 times more sensitive than the Southern blot-based method and the reproducibility is excellent , with an intraday coefficient of variance ( CV ) of 5-9% and an interday CV of 4-12% .
Application of the QPCR assay to ex vivo melphalan-treated peripheral blood mononuclear cells from multiple myeloma patients , showed that the positive predictive value of this assay for clinical response to melphalan therapy was 92.9% .
CONCLUSION The PCR-based assay developed in this study can be used for the selection of cancer patients more likely to benefit from therapeutic treatment with alkylating drugs .
