BACKGROUND Peritoneal transport status is important not only for prescription , but also as a prognostic index .
Flt-1 and Flk-1 , the major vascular endothelial growth factor receptors involved in angiogenesis and hyperpermeability , may play a potent role in determining peritoneal transport characteristics .
However , the relationship between them has not been studied to date .
We hypothesized that Flt-1 and Flk-1 expression in the peritoneal vasculature of uremic patients could be closely related to baseline peritoneal transport status .
METHODS Thirty-six new patients without a previous history of peritonitis were enrolled .
Clinical parameters such as age , sex , height , weight , causes of renal failure , and residual renal function were assessed .
Parietal peritoneal biopsies were obtained during implantation of peritoneal dialytic catheters .
Flt-1 and Flk-1 were semi-quantitatively evaluated by immunohistochemical staining .
Peritoneal microvascular density ( MVD ) was counted .
Within 6 weeks after commencing peritoneal dialysis , a standard peritoneal equilibration test was performed , and the dialysate-to-plasma concentration ratio for creatinine at 4 h ( D4/P Cr ) was determined .
The patients were divided into two groups based on the D4/P Cr : more than 0.65 ( Group H , n = 22 ) and less than or equal to 0.65 ( Group L , n = 14 ) .
The 24-h peritoneal protein excretion ( PPE ) was assayed .
Flt-1 and Flk-1 were correlated with peritoneal MVD , D4/P Cr , and PPE .
RESULTS Flt-1 and Flk-1 were detected in the peritoneal vasculature of uremic patients .
Flt-1 expression was similar between the two groups , but Flk-1 expression in Group H was significantly higher than that in Group L ( p = 0.001 ) .
Flt-1 expression did not show significant correlations with peritoneal MVD , D4/P Cr , and PPE .
However , Flk-1 expression showed significant correlations with the above three parameters ( p < 0.001 for all ) .
CONCLUSIONS For the first time , the expressions of Flt-1 and Flk-1 in peritoneal vasculature of uremic patients were detected .
Flk-1 expression in peritoneal vasculature of uremic patients is closely correlated with the number of peritoneal microvessels , peritoneal small solute transport rate , and PPE .
Our findings strongly suggest that Flk-1 may be a crucial determinant of baseline peritoneal transport characteristics .
Further interventional studies are needed .
