BACKGROUND Modern allotetraploid cotton contains an " A " and " D " genome from an ancestral polyploidy event that occurred approximately 1-2 million years ago .
Diploid A- and D-genome species can be compared to the A- and D-genomes found within these allotetraploids to make evolutionary inferences about polyploidy .
In this paper we present a comprehensive EST assembly derived from diploid and model allotetraploid cottons and demonstrate several evolutionary inferences regarding genic evolution that can be drawn from these data .
RESULTS We generated a set of cotton expressed sequence tags ( ESTs ) , comprising approximately 4.4 million Sanger and next-generation ( 454 ) transcripts supplemented by approximately 152 million Illumina reads from diploid and allotetraploid cottons .
From the EST alignments we inferred 259,192 genome-specific single nucleotide polymorphisms ( SNPs ) .
Molecular evolutionary analyses of protein-coding regions demonstrate that the rate of nucleotide substitution has increased among both allotetraploid genomes relative to the diploids , and that the ratio of nonsynonymous to synonymous substitutions has increased in one of the two polyploid lineages we sampled .
We also use these SNPs to show that a surprisingly high percentage of duplicate genes ( show a signature of non-independent evolution in the allotetraploid nucleus , having experienced one or more episodes of nonreciprocal homoeologous recombination ( NRHR ) .
CONCLUSIONS In this study we characterize the functional and mutational properties of the cotton transcriptome , produce a large genome-specific SNP database , and detect illegitimate genetic exchanges between duplicate genomes sharing a common allotetraploid nucleus .
Our findings have important implications for our understanding of the consequences of polyploidy and duplicate gene evolution .
We demonstrate that cotton genes have experienced an increased rate of molecular evolution following duplication by polyploidy , and that polyploidy has enabled considerable levels of nonreciprocal exchange between homoeologous genes .
