BACKGROUND The MYB superfamily constitutes one of the most abundant groups of transcription factors described in plants .
Nevertheless , their functions appear to be highly diverse and remain rather unclear .
To date , no genome-wide characterization of this gene family has been conducted in a legume species .
Here we report the first genome-wide analysis of the whole MYB superfamily in a legume species , soybean ( Glycine max ) , including the gene structures , phylogeny , chromosome locations , conserved motifs , and expression patterns , as well as a comparative genomic analysis with Arabidopsis .
RESULTS A total of 244 R2R3-MYB genes were identified and further classified into 48 subfamilies based on a phylogenetic comparative analysis with their putative orthologs , showed both gene loss and duplication events .
The phylogenetic analysis showed that most characterized MYB genes with similar functions are clustered in the same subfamily , together with the identification of orthologs by synteny analysis , functional conservation among subgroups of MYB genes was strongly indicated .
The phylogenetic relationships of each subgroup of MYB genes were well supported by the highly conserved intron/exon structures and motifs outside the MYB domain .
Synonymous nucleotide substitution ( dN/dS ) analysis showed that the soybean MYB DNA-binding domain is under strong negative selection .
The chromosome distribution pattern strongly indicated that genome-wide segmental and tandem duplication contribute to the expansion of soybean MYB genes .
In addition , we found that\u2009 of soybean R2R3-MYB genes had undergone alternative splicing events , producing a variety of transcripts from a single gene , which illustrated the extremely high complexity of transcriptome regulation .
Comparative expression profile analysis of R2R3-MYB genes in soybean and Arabidopsis revealed that MYB genes play conserved and various roles in plants , which is indicative of a divergence in function .
CONCLUSIONS In this study we identified the largest MYB gene family in plants known to date .
Our findings indicate that members of this large gene family may be involved in different plant biological processes , some of which may be potentially involved in legume-specific nodulation .
Our comparative genomics analysis provides a solid foundation for future functional dissection of this family gene .
