BACKGROUND The uneven distribution of recombination across the length of chromosomes results in inaccurate estimates of genetic to physical distances .
In wheat ( Triticum aestivum L. ) chromosome 3B , it has been estimated that 90% of the cross over events occur in distal sub-telomeric regions representing 40% of the chromosome .
Radiation hybrid ( RH ) mapping which does not rely on recombination is a strategy to map genomes and has been widely employed in animal species and more recently in some plants .
RH maps have been proposed to provide i ) higher and ii ) more uniform resolution than genetic maps , and iii ) to be independent of the distribution patterns observed for meiotic recombination .
An in vivo RH panel was generated for mapping chromosome 3B of wheat in an attempt to provide a complete scaffold for this Gb segment of the genome and compare the resolution to previous genetic maps .
RESULTS A high density RH map with 541 marker loci anchored to chromosome 3B spanning a total distance of 1871.9 cR was generated .
Detailed comparisons with a genetic map of similar quality confirmed that i ) the overall resolution of the RH map was 10.5 fold higher and ii ) six fold more uniform .
A significant interaction ( r = 0.879 at p = 0.01 ) was observed between the DNA repair mechanism and the distribution of crossing-over events .
This observation could be explained by accepting the possibility that the DNA repair mechanism in somatic cells is affected by the chromatin state in a way similar to the effect that chromatin state has on recombination frequencies in gametic cells .
CONCLUSIONS The RH data presented here support for the first time in vivo the hypothesis of non-casual interaction between recombination hot-spots and DNA repair .
Further , two major hypotheses are presented on how chromatin compactness could affect the DNA repair mechanism .
Since the initial RH application 37 years ago , we were able to show for the first time that the iii ) third hypothesis of RH mapping might not be entirely correct .
