BACKGROUND MicroRNAs ( miRNAs ) are short , non-coding RNAs ( nt ) that play important roles in the pathogenesis of human diseases by negatively regulating gene expression .
Although miR-196a has been implicated in several other cancers , its role in non-small cell lung cancer ( NSCLC ) is unknown .
The aim of the present study was to examine the expression pattern of miR-196a in NSCLC and its clinical significance , as well as its biological role in tumor progression .
METHODS Expression of miR-196a was analyzed in 34 NSCLC tissues and five NSCLC cell lines by quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction ( qRT-PCR ) .
The effect of DNA methylation on miR-196a expression was investigated by 5-aza-2-deoxy-cytidine treatment and bisulfite sequencing .
The effect of miR-196a on proliferation was evaluated by MTT and colony formation assays , and cell migration and invasion were evaluated by transwell assays .
Analysis of target protein expression was determined by western blotting .
Luciferase reporter plasmids were constructed to confirm the action of miR-196a on downstream target genes , including HOXA5 .
Differences between the results were tested for significance using Student's t-test ( two-tailed ) .
RESULTS miR-196a was highly expressed both in NSCLC samples and cell lines compared with their corresponding normal counterparts , and the expression of miR-196a may be affected by DNA demethylation .
Higher expression of miR-196a in NSCLC tissues was associated with a higher clinical stage , and also correlated with NSCLC lymph-node metastasis .
In vitro functional assays demonstrated that modulation of miR-196a expression affected NSCLC cell proliferation , migration and invasion .
Our analysis showed that miR-196a suppressed the expression of HOXA5 both at the mRNA and protein levels , and luciferase assays confirmed that miR-196a directly bound to the 3'untranslated region of HOXA5 .
Knockdown of HOXA5 expression in A549 cells using RNAi was shown to promote NSCLC cell proliferation , migration and invasion .
Finally , we observed an inverse correlation between HOXA5 and miR-196a expression in NSCLC tissues .
CONCLUSIONS Our findings indicate that miR-196a is significantly up-regulated in NSCLC tissues , and regulates NSCLC cell proliferation , migration and invasion , partially via the down-regulation of HOXA5 .
Thus , miR-196a may represent a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC intervention .
