5-Thyminyl-5,6-dihydrothymine ( also called spore photoproduct or SP ) is the exclusive DNA photodamage product in bacterial endospores .
It is repaired by a radical SAM ( S-adenosylmethionine ) enzyme , the spore photoproduct lyase ( SPL ) , at the bacterial early germination phase .
Our previous studies proved that SPL utilizes the 5'-dA\u2022 generated by the SAM cleavage reaction to abstract the H(6proR) atom to initiate the SP repair process .
The resulting thymine allylic radical was suggested to take an H atom from an unknown protein source , most likely cysteine 141 .
Here we show that C141 can be readily alkylated in the native SPL by an iodoacetamide treatment , suggesting that it is accessible to the TpT radical .
SP repair by the SPL C141A mutant yields TpTSO(2)(-) and TpT simultaneously from the very beginning of the reaction ; no lag phase is observed for TpTSO(2)(-) formation .
Should any other protein residue serve as the H donor , its presence would result in TpT being the major product at least for the first enzyme turnover .
These observations provide strong evidence to support C141 as the direct H atom donor .
Moreover , because of the lack of this intrinsic H donor , the C141A mutant produces TpT via an unprecedented thymine cation radical reduction ( proton-coupled electron transfer ) process , contrasting to the H atom transfer mechanism in the wild-type ( WT ) SPL reaction .
The C141A mutant repairs SP at a rate that is slower than that of the WT enzyme .
Formation of TpTSO(2)(-) and TpT exhibits a V(max) deuterium kinetic isotope effect ( KIE ) of 1.7 ± 0.2 , which is smaller than the ( D)V(max ) KIE of 2.8 ± 0.3 determined for the WT SPL reaction .
These findings suggest that removing the intrinsic H atom donor disturbs the rate-limiting process during enzyme catalysis .
As expected , the prereduced C141A mutant supports only turnover , which is in sharp contrast to the >5 turnovers exhibited by the WT SPL reaction , suggesting that the enzyme catalytic cycle ( SAM regeneration ) is disrupted by this single mutation .
