BACKGROUND Inherited malabsorption of cobalamin ( Cbl ) causes hematological and neurological abnormalities that can be fatal .
Three genes have been implicated in Cbl malabsorption ; yet , only about 10% of reported cases have been molecularly studied to date .
Recessive mutations in CUBN or AMN cause Imerslund-Gräsbeck Syndrome ( IGS ) , while recessive mutations in GIF cause Intrinsic Factor Deficiency ( IFD ) .
IGS and IFD differ in that IGS usually presents with proteinuria , which is not observed in IFD .
The genetic heterogeneity and numerous differential diagnoses make clinical assessment difficult .
METHODS We present a large genetic screening study of 154 families or patients with suspected hereditary Cbl malabsorption .
Patients and their families have been accrued over a period spanning >12\u2009 years .
Systematic genetic testing of the three genes CUBN , AMN , and GIF was accomplished using a combination of single strand conformation polymorphism and DNA and RNA sequencing .
In addition , six genes that were contenders for a role in inherited Cbl malabsorption were studied in a subset of these patients .
RESULTS Our results revealed population-specific mutations , mutational hotspots , and functionally distinct regions in the three causal genes .
We identified mutations in 126/154 unrelated cases ( 82% ) .
Fifty-three of 126 cases ( 42% ) were mutated in CUBN , 45/126 ( 36% ) were mutated in AMN , and 28/126 ( 22% ) had mutations in GIF .
We found 26 undescribed mutations in CUBN , 19 in AMN , and 7 in GIF for a total of 52 novel defects described herein .
We excluded six other candidate genes as culprits and concluded that additional genes might be involved .
CONCLUSIONS Cbl malabsorption is found worldwide and genetically complex .
However , our results indicate that population-specific founder mutations are quite common .
Consequently , targeted genetic testing has become feasible if ethnic ancestry is considered .
These results will facilitate clinical and molecular genetic testing of Cbl malabsorption .
Early diagnosis improves the lifelong care required by these patients and prevents potential neurological long-term complications .
This study provides the first comprehensive overview of the genetics that underlies the inherited Cbl malabsorption phenotype .
