5-methylcytosine ( 5-mC ) constitutes of the total cytosines in human genomic DNA and impacts a broad range of biological functions , including gene expression , maintenance of genome integrity , parental imprinting , X-chromosome inactivation , regulation of development , aging , and cancer(1) .
Recently , the presence of an oxidized 5-mC , 5-hydroxymethylcytosine ( 5-hmC ) , was discovered in mammalian cells , in particular in embryonic stem ( ES ) cells and neuronal cells(2-4). 5-hmC is generated by oxidation of 5-mC catalyzed by TET family iron ( II)/α-ketoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases(2 , 3). 5-hmC is proposed to be involved in the maintenance of embryonic stem ( mES ) cell , normal hematopoiesis and malignancies , and zygote development(2 , 5-10 ) .
To better understand the function of 5-hmC , a reliable and straightforward sequencing system is essential .
Traditional bisulfite sequencing cannot distinguish 5-hmC from 5-mC(11) .
To unravel the biology of 5-hmC , we have developed a highly efficient and selective chemical approach to label and capture 5-hmC , taking advantage of a bacteriophage enzyme that adds a glucose moiety to 5-hmC specifically(12) .
Here we describe a straightforward two-step procedure for selective chemical labeling of 5-hmC .
In the first labeling step , 5-hmC in genomic DNA is labeled with a 6-azide-glucose catalyzed by β-GT , a glucosyltransferase from T4 bacteriophage , in a way that transfers the 6-azide-glucose to 5-hmC from the modified cofactor , UDP-6-N3-Glc ( 6-N3UDPG ) .
In the second step , biotinylation , a disulfide biotin linker is attached to the azide group by click chemistry .
Both steps are highly specific and efficient , leading to complete labeling regardless of the abundance of 5-hmC in genomic regions and giving extremely low background .
Following biotinylation of 5-hmC , the 5-hmC-containing DNA fragments are then selectively captured using streptavidin beads in a density-independent manner .
The resulting 5-hmC-enriched DNA fragments could be used for downstream analyses , including next-generation sequencing .
Our selective labeling and capture protocol confers high sensitivity , applicable to any source of genomic DNA with variable/diverse 5-hmC abundances .
Although the main purpose of this protocol is its downstream application ( i.e. , next-generation sequencing to map out the 5-hmC distribution in genome ) , it is compatible with single-molecule , real-time SMRT ( DNA ) sequencing , which is capable of delivering single-base resolution sequencing of 5-hmC .
