AMP-activated protein kinase ( AMPK ) has been implicated in anti-proliferative actions in a range of cell systems .
Recently , it was observed that Compound C , an inhibitor of AMPK , also reduced the cell viability in human diploid fibroblasts ( HDFs ) .
Compound C-induced growth arrest was associated with a decrease in the cell cycle regulatory proteins , such as proliferating cell nuclear antigen , phosphorylated pRB , cyclin-dependent protein kinases ( Cdk 2 and 4 ) , cyclins ( D and E ) , and the Cdk inhibitors ( p21 , p16 , and p27 ) .
Therefore , the present study examined the molecular mechanism of the antiproliferative effects of Compound C. Although Compound C inhibited serum-induced phosphorylation of Akt and its substrate , glycogen synthase kinase-3β , it did not affect the Akt activity in vitro .
Compound C significantly inhibited the receptor tyrosine phosphorylation and the activity of downstream signaling molecules , such as p85 phosphoinositide 3-kinase , phospholipase C-γ1 , and extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 , induced by platelet-derived growth factor ( PDGF ) but not by epidermal growth factor- and insulin-like growth factor .
In vitro growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase activity profiling revealed the IC(50) for PDGF receptor-β ( PDGFRβ ) to be 5.07 μM , whereas the IC(50) for the epidermal growth factor receptor and insulin-like growth factor receptor was ≥100 μM .
The inhibitory effect of Compound C on PDGFRβ and Akt was also observed in AMPKα(1)/α(2)-knockout mouse embryonic fibroblasts , indicating that its inhibitory effect is independent of the AMPK activity .
The inhibitory effect of Compound C on cell proliferation and PDGFRβ tyrosine phosphorylation was also demonstrated in various PDGFR-expressing cells , including MRC-5 , BEAS-2B , rat aortic vascular smooth muscle cells , and A172 glioblastoma cells .
These results indicate that Compound C can be used as a potential antiproliferative agent for PDGF- or PDGFR-associated diseases , such as cancer , atherosclerosis , and fibrosis .
