Chromosomal DNA must be in single-strand form for important transactions such as replication , transcription , and recombination to occur .
The single-strand DNA ( ssDNA ) is more prone to damage than double-strand DNA ( dsDNA ) , due to greater exposure of chemically reactive moieties in the nitrogenous bases .
Thus , there can be agents that damage regions of ssDNA in vivo while being inert toward dsDNA .
To assess the potential hazard posed by such agents , we devised an ssDNA-specific mutagenesis reporter system in budding yeast .
The reporter strains bear the cdc13-1 temperature-sensitive mutation , such that shifting to 37°C results in telomere uncapping and ensuing 5 ' to 3 ' enzymatic resection .
This exposes the reporter region , containing three closely-spaced reporter genes , as a long 3 ' ssDNA overhang .
We validated the ability of the system to detect mutagenic damage within ssDNA by expressing a modified human single-strand specific cytosine deaminase , APOBEC3G .
APOBEC3G induced a high density of substitutions at cytosines in the ssDNA overhang strand , resulting in frequent , simultaneous inactivation of two reporter genes .
We then examined the mutagenicity of sulfites , a class of reactive sulfur oxides to which humans are exposed frequently via respiration and food intake .
Sulfites , at a concentration similar to that found in some foods , induced a high density of mutations , almost always as substitutions at cytosines in the ssDNA overhang strand , resulting in simultaneous inactivation of at least two reporter genes .
Furthermore , sulfites formed a long-lived adducted 2'-deoxyuracil intermediate in DNA that was resistant to excision by uracil-DNA N-glycosylase .
This intermediate was bypassed by error-prone translesion DNA synthesis , frequently involving Pol \u03b6 , during repair synthesis .
Our results suggest that sulfite-induced lesions in DNA can be particularly deleterious , since cells might not possess the means to repair or bypass such lesions accurately .
