Prostate cancer is responsible for major deaths globally after lung cancer .
However , etiology of prostate cancer is still unknown .
Individual risk and incidence of prostate cancer may result from the interaction of genetic susceptibility with exposure to environmental factors such as infectious agents , tobacco , occupational exposure , dietary carcinogens , and/or hormonal imbalances leading to injury of the prostate and to the development of chronic inflammation .
About 30% of all human cancers are caused by tobacco smoking and inhaled pollutants .
Inflammation is now regarded as an important hallmark of cancer .
The present study has been aimed to explore the pro-inflammatory levels in prostate carcinoma patients by examining the serum levels of novel cytokine interleukin-18 ( IL-18 ) expression in tobacco exposed population .
A total of 578 ( n = 284 biopsy proven prostate cancer patients , n = 294 controls with and without tobacco exposed population ) were recruited .
Serum IL-18 ( Interleukin-18 ) level was done by ELISA .
The IL-18 levels between cancer patients and controls within same mode tobacco exposure as tobacco smoking ( overall ) showed significant difference ( P < 0.0001 ) and further we compared within stratified group , it significantly differ ( P < 0.0001 ) in bidi and cigarette smoking than control non users .
Furthermore , IL-18 levels in tobacco chewers ( overall ) with gutkha and khaini chewers showed significant difference ( P < 0.01 ) than controls non users .
Moreover , the IL-18 levels between cancer patients and controls with in of combined mode chewers smokers and alcohol ( CSA ) , smokers with alcohol showed significant difference ( P < 0.01 ) than controls .
The IL-18 levels also differed significantly ( P < 0.05 ) with smokers and chewers in higher stages of III and IV , and showed non significant with in lower stages .
Tobacco exposure enhance the inflammation in prostate carcinoma patients in stratified group as it have been represented as a risk factors in various cancers , but this study provide further its role that seems to influence inflammation especially in prostate carcinoma .
