Previously , we reported that Helicobacter pylori-associated gastritis and gastric cancer are closely associated with increased levels of hydrogen sulfide ( H2S ) and that Korean red ginseng significantly reduced the severity of H. pylori-associated gastric diseases by attenuating H2S generation .
Because the incubation of endothelial cells with H2S has been known to enhance their angiogenic activities , we hypothesized that the amelioration of H2S-induced gastric inflammation or angiogenesis in human umbilical vascular endothelial cells ( HUVECs ) might explain the preventive effect of Korean red ginseng on H. pylori-associated carcinogenesis .
The expression of inflammatory mediators , angiogenic growth factors , and angiogenic activities in the absence or presence of Korean red ginseng extracts ( KRGE ) were evaluated in HUVECs stimulated with the H2S generator sodium hydrogen sulfide ( NaHS ) .
KRGE efficiently decreased the expression of cystathionine β-synthase and cystathionine γ-lyase , enzymes that are essential for H2S synthesis .
Concomitantly , a significant decrease in the expression of inflammatory mediators , including cyclooxygenase-2 and inducible nitric oxide synthase , and several angiogenic factors , including interleukin ( IL)-8 , hypoxia inducible factor-1a , vascular endothelial growth factor , IL-6 , and matrix metalloproteinases , was observed ; all of these factors are normally induced after NaHS .
An in vitro angiogenesis assay demonstrated that NaHS significantly increased tube formation in endothelial cells , whereas KRGE pretreatment significantly attenuated tube formation .
NaHS activated p38 and Akt , increasing the expression of angiogenic factors and the proliferation of HUVECs , whereas KRGE effectively abrogated this H2S-activated angiogenesis and the increase in inflammatory mediators in vascular endothelial cells .
In conclusion , KRGE was able to mitigate H2S-induced angiogenesis , implying that antagonistic action against H2S-induced angiogenesis may be the mechanism underlying the gastric cancer preventive effects of KRGE in H. pylori infection .
